---
title: Workshop
author: Colton Grainger
created: 2017-10-18
tags: orientation
belief: likely
---

Notes for the first workshop at Gallery Boom!

# Scenarios

The teen daughter of the family in room 106  is out late past curfew; there are rumors that she’s been sneaking out of shelter to go drink with her friends. The father approaches you and asks that if she shows up that you do not let her in; he says she gets belligerent when she’s drunk and doesn’t want her to wake her sisters or other cause a disturbance for other families in shelter, and feels this will teach her a lesson. 

It’s late after staff have left, and there are two families in room 103 that are arguing through-out the night; nothing has reached the point of being threatening or violent, but it’s progressing louder and it’s getting more heated. It eventually gets to the point where one of them is demanding to change room... however, we have no more space available, and the other families are not willing to switch rooms around. 

# Confidentiality

- spectra of privacy 
	- discrete
	- indiscrete
- disclosure 
	- between shelter clients?
	- on the phone?
	- to law enforcement?

# De-Escalation

1. Be empathic and nonjudgemental.
2. Respect personal space.
3. Use nonthreatening nonverbals.
4. Avoid overreacting.
5. Focus on feelings.
6. Ignore challenging questions.
7. Set limits.
8. Choose wisely what to insist on.
9. Allow silence for reflection.
10. Allow time for decisions.

# Program Overview

- Strengths perspective
	- "families are doing everything in their power to provide for their kiddos"
- persons experiencing homelessness
- about 3k school aged kids doubled up or unsheltered
- Housing First Model
	- not worrying about the job, the license, etc
	- let's build a basis around housing
- changes in 

# Cause prioritization

- we run the VISPDAT for unsheltered famillies.
	- written by Thurston County
	- sleeping somewhere "not meant for human habitation"
	- accounts for medical vulnerability
	- chronicity of homelessness
- objective/subjective?
	- families sleeping in vans
	- right now 200 families on VI list

# Reflections? Reaction?

- Where should the program change?
- How does shelter fit in larger social movements? Which one?
- Is volunteering effective altruism?
