---
title: Outline of volunteer responsibilities
author: Colton Grainger
date: 2017-09-29
modified: 2018-01-04
status: notes
tags:
  - orientation 
---

Here's an outline of volunteer responsibilities for shelter. Notice especially that *visiting hours* are from __9am--5pm Mon--Fri__. 

## Outline

- Shelter Intranet
	- check the guest list
	- review special notes or updates needed to keep the shelter secure
	- on call staff (what's their responsibility?)
		- some stigma
		- whenever social work or law enforcement calls
		- text if someone misses a shift
		- asking for advice (what's the next step?)
			- yelling or screaming
			- confrontation

- Staff Support
	- checking the keys
		- room keys
		- trash key 
	- more accessible to newcomers
	- phone list should be up to date
	- front door should lock

- Pre-shift check-in
	- speak to staff or greeters
	- status of guests?
		- new
		- children (esp teens)
		- sick
		- bed bugs/lice

- Screened Entry
	- should explain the [VISPDAT]
	- we can't let sex offenders on the property
	- [RSO]()
	- doors closed and locked at all time
		- note if the door opens without 
	- welcome guests on shelter list only
	- residents
		- on intranet
	- visitors (9am--5pm M--F)
		- note arrival time
		- add to approved visitor list
	- service providers
		- child support
		- law enforcement
		- did we call them?

- Supplies (from Keiya, HFS program manager)
	- email to [Keiya]() for more supplies
	- toiletries
	- diapers
	- gloves
	- soaps
	- crafts
	- food pantry
	- anything broken email to [safety@fscss.org]()

- Cleaning?
	- different zones
	- how to follow up on people's left overs
	- rotating responsibilities
		- knocking on a door
		- washing dishes
		- emptying the dish washer
		- replacing the soap
		- microwaving
	- schedule for days of the week
		- earlier during the day
		- 5--7p

- Answering the phone
	- [resources]()
		- other shelters
			- details on CW shelter
			- CE, VISPDAT process
			- hours of operation
		- hot meals
		- open public during the day
		- WIC, formula, diapers
			- YWCA on wednesdays
	- referrals
	- screening a family
		- where did you sleep last night?

- Disputes
	- to medidiate minor difficulties among the guests
	- major dispute to call the back-up staff 
		- throwing or physical
		- threats of violence
		- *get ahold of the on-call*
	- note the *time, person and event*
	- Disputes between kiddos

- Overnight
	- boundaries at night
		- letting eachother inside after 11p
		- worried about who is letting other folks in the building
		- communicating if a curfew is set
	- remain at shelter until 7am
	- bunk beds for sleeping
	- be ready for emergent issues

- Substances
	- no alcohol or non-Rx drugs
	- some clients with Rx
	- smoking off property (not in the building)

- Room Tour
	- what's the community room used for?
	- staff meetings
	- volunteer / monthly meetings

## Feedback

> Talk about protocol. I feel like it changes a lot.

> I think [the families at PBP] need to be respectful of the other families that live at PBP and the volunteers that want to support them... they may need to work hard on not swearing or yelling or degrading their own children. 

> discuss consistency, for instance, the use of computer; set a time limit and stick to it. it doesn't matter if child is the only one in the common area. if 
kids begin to bang on the keyboard, argue or crowd each other; give 1 warning. then unplug it.

## Program Overview 

- Strengths perspective
	- "families are doing everything in their power to provide for their kiddos"
- persons experiencing homelessness
- about 3k school aged kids doubled up or unsheltered in thurston county
- Housing First Model
	- not worrying about the job, the license, etc
	- let's build a basis around housing

## Cause prioritization

- we run the VISPDAT for unsheltered famillies.
	- written by Thurston County
	- sleeping somewhere "not meant for human habitation"
	- accounts for medical vulnerability
	- chronicity of homelessness
- objective/subjective?
	- families sleeping in vans
	- right now 200 families on VI list

## Reflections? Reaction?

- Where should the program change?
- How does shelter fit in larger social movements? Which one?
- Is volunteering effective altruism?

# response to volunteer manual

## Historical Overview

FSC has been around since 1992. Our mission is Working Together to Strengthen ALL
Families.

We took on the family shelter on November 1, 2009 because it was a need in our
community. We rotated from church to church for a few months, then settled at First
Christian Church.

We are the largest homeless family shelter in Thurston County. We are the coordinated
entry point for all homeless families. We are the first stop. We are one of the ONLY
options.

We acquired Pear Blossom Place, formerly The Smith Building, through a grant process with the
City of Olympia. We purchased it for $1 and made a 40 year commitment to provide a
family shelter and permanent affordable housing. We raised $2 million for rehabbing.
Over the past 18 months this building has been transformed to provide a shelter for
families with children, in addition to 7 permanent affordable housing apartments
for families, with supportive services on site.

## Eligible Population

We serve families with children. Typically mom + children, mom & dad +
children, pregnant mom with partner, mom & dad & grandma + children.

We are FLEXIBLE. We accept the family as they present themselves. We work to
strengthen the family unit, regardless of it’s makeup.

We “screen people” into shelter, completing full criminal background checks
and Registered Sex Offender Checks on all adults. We will not allow anyone into
shelter with violent offenses or arson. The Deptuty and Executive Directors take 
close look at all background checks, and always think about the safety of families and
volunteers.

## Architectural Overview

Family Shelter (1st Floor)
- Includes 6 shelter units (101-106)
- Common area with living room furniture, computer work station, children’s
area, piano, community kitchen, fire place, tables & chairs
- Laundry- 2 stackable for guest use, 1 front load set for volunteers/staff
- 3 offices: Volunteer, Case Manager (Lori Christmas) and Property Manager
(to be hired)- 2 of the offices will have bunk beds for overnight host use
- Men and Women’s restroom
- ADA Accessible shower
- Reception/Volunteer desk with NEW computer
- Security camera at side door, buzzer system for doors

Low-Income Housing 
- 107 ADA accessible 3 bedroom apartment
- 201--206 6 apartments (4 two bedrooms, 2 three bedrooms)

Apartments have a separate entrance from shelter

Community Room on the 2nd floor

## Individual Shelter Units

Our research tells us that individual shelter units will make life a whole lot better!

REVIEW: "All units have their own bathrooms (with the exception of unit 103), cooktop,
refrigerator, closets, kitchen table & chairs, bunk beds, highchair, crib, windows."

Unit 103 is designed to be wheelchair accessible, and will use the bathrooms in the
community room and the communal shower.

REVIEW: Each unit locks and is key card accessible. Each family will have a key card to access
their units. Volunteers will have an emergency “master” key card.

Some families will share units. Our capacity is 36 individuals, and it will be up to the
Property Manager to coordinate the units to make sure we’re making the best use
of all available space. 

REVIEW: We will have 30 actual bunk beds, plus cribs.

Volunteers will not be expected to move families or worry about where to put
families after hours. We’ll have a plan! 

## Bathrooms & Laundry

There are two public men’s and women’s bathroom in the common area, in
addition to a shower.

These bathrooms will need to be monitored by volunteers. Please keep a good
eye on them and make sure we are aware of who’s in and out.

We want to make sure children aren’t in there alone (if little), someone isn’t
taking in a child that doesn’t belong to them, etc.

Volunteers will have access to the laundry room. We appreciate any help
keeping up with the laundry. Families can use the stackable laundry machines
only.

Families will have a specified day to wash their own bedding and clothing.
With turnover and families exiting, we will need to keep up with other laundry.

## Television

We have a television in the community room.

It will have basic cable and access to Netflix for movies.

REVIEW: Volunteers and staff have control of this ONLY.

It gets turned off by 10pm.

REVIEW: Use your judgment- family friendly only. Nothing inappropriate and be firm.

REVIEW: Do not relinquish the remote!

## coming & going

REVIEW: Families will be allowed to come and go during certain hours- 9am to 5pm when
staff are present.

We encourage people to go OUT, enjoy the sunshine, job search, take the kids to
the park, go to dinner... do things that you and I do on a daily basis.

REVIEW: After a certain hour the main doors to shelter will lock. After that time, families
will have to be buzzed into the shelter from the side door. This will allow you to
know who’s here, and ensure only guests are entering.

Visitors will not be allowed.

REVIEW: There will be a “curfew” for when families need to be in for the night, and a
“lights out” for their units, which is 10:00pm.

We will have a guest list, likely the Google Site, where volunteers and staff are
able to see who is screened in and approved at shelter.

REVIEW: There will be a Sign in-Sign out book at the reception desk that all families will
use when entering & leaving the building.

at what age is too young to leave the building independently?

no curfew, no lights out

## keys & doors

Each adult guest/family will have a key card that gives them access to their own
unit, and the laundry room on their specified day.

REVIEW: The key cards are programmable, and staff will be responsible for “turning keys
off” if someone leaves shelter for good and doesn’t return their key.

The property manager will be responsible for issuing cards to new guests. If you
bring someone into shelter at night, you do not need to worry about getting
them a key card.

REVIEW: There will be a “Lock Down” key in a designated place. If the building needs to
be put on lock down for an emergency, you swipe that key in front of any door,
and everything locks.

## Privacy & Safety

We have to find the balance between a family’s right to privacy and dignity to be in
their own unit with their family, and the overall safety of families and volunteers.

We ask that all volunteers “knock” before entering a unit.

Just like our current shelter, if you hear yelling, crying, something out of the ordinary,
please check.

Knock first. “It’s Natalie- can I come in?” Take it from there.

Follow your gut, ask your co-volunteer. Remember your safety and the safety of the
guests and children.

If anything is unsafe, violent, threatening... 
call the on-call staff / 911, whoever is more appropriate.

## Boundaries

Smoking is NOT allowed in the units, or out of the windows! If you smell smoke,
knock and ask to enter. If a family is smoking, remind them of the
rules/expectations, and follow up with your backup staff.

Vapor and E-Cigarettes are not allowed at shelter.
Entering the units should be for emergency situations only. If you and a family are
chatting, please do so in the community area.

If something is broken, you will contact the Property Manager and they will come
on site to fix it.

## Supporting Parents

Families are expected to keep an eye on their children at all times. A parent or
guardian must be with their children at all times.

If a parent goes outside to smoke, they ought to bring their children. Even if the kiddos 
are napping.

If parent wants to run to the grocery store, the children need to go too.

See that parent leaving without their children?
	“Hey Michelle, I need ya to bring your kiddos with you.”
	“Hey Jack, where’s Johnny?”

Gentle. Kind. Non accusatory. Give them the benefit of the doubt. Be firm.

REVIEW: If kids are asleep, parents need to be in the unit. They cannot go out to smoke
or hang out in the common area and leave their children alone.

Think liability!

## Bike & Stroller Closet

misnomer: it's really for CW sleeping supplies

parking is for shelter guests, apartment residents, volunteers.

## service animals

As you know, we accept all service animals.

We will be designating specific units for service animals. We will keep you
posted with what units those are.

Pets are not allowed. Families have to make other arrangements for pets.

Fair housing prohibits you from questioning them about their service animal
or their disability. If you have any questions or concerns about it, please speak
with the on-call supervisor. 

## Phones

We will have a phone at shelter! Hooray! “Pear Blossom Place, this is Natalie...”
The “Shift Lead” line- 628-7343 – is moving to shelter. It will now be answered
from the reception desk at the shelter 24/7.

REVIEW: We are moving from the line being a 24 hour community hotline, to the shelter
phone. (Don't we offer the Coordinated Entry Hotline?)

How are folks screened into shelter? Why does this process have to be obscured? 

## shelter screening

REVIEW: regular vs cold weather season 

REVIEW: info on the VISPDAT
REVIEW: when to call the backup

oncall vs police?
oncall vs Keiya?
oncall vs Colton?

## Security

The lights in the common room will stay on at all times. This allows for clear visual
in the open space, bathroom entrances, etc.

Guests will be buzzed in after hours.

There are always a minimum of two people at all times, whether volunteer or staff.

Hosts are allowed to sleep, but we ask that you keep the door partially opened so
you can hear if guests need you, someone buzzes to come in, or the phone rings.

## Emergencies 

REVIEW: There are 2 red alarmed emergency exits out of shelter. If the door is opened, an
alarm will go off. It will go off after a specified period of time and we will have keys
to turn it off in the event of a false alarm.

If we have to evacuate, our meeting point is: the sidewalk on 7 th Avenue.

If you call 911 or the police/EMTs/Fire Dept respond, you must call your backup
staff person.

In the event of an active fire, the sprinkler and alarms will automatically activated.

The Fire Department will automatically be called and everyone will need to evacuate
out of the closest emergency exist.

Each shelter unit has an egress window for emergency exit.

REVIEW: Please grab the sign in/out book so you know who to account for.

REVIEW: In the event of a power outage, all of the key doors and exits are on a battery backup. This will rarely happen as we’re on the city grid! The first to have our power back!

REVIEW: First Aid kits will be located throughout the building (kitchen, reception desk, etc.).

If someone is injured, they will need to fill out an incident report that you can clearly
find at the reception desk. (Ie: Child hits their head and first aid is administered, a
form needs to be completed by the volunteer & parent).

## Community Kitchen

REVIEW: At this time, the kitchen in the common area is only for staff & volunteer use. This will be clearly marked. Families should be cooking in their own units only. Feel free to
bake cookies or pizza with the kiddos- you just have to be in control!

## Engaging with Children

Always make sure there is another adult present in the room when you are
with children.

Limit physical contact with children and guests.

Engage parents in the conversation- “Hey, can I help Johnny with his
homework?”

Make your presence known, it makes guests feel safe!

REVIEW: Families & children have to sleep in their own unit. Johnny can’t sleep in his
friend’s unit for the night.

REVIEW: apartment kids visiting? after hours? etc?

## boundaries with clients 
- see also AJ's presentation

Personal and professional boundaries with families is crucial. You are an extension
of staff, and we ask that you maintain professional boundaries at all times.

Have an “elevator speech”. We want you to be genuine, but do not over-share.

Never give out your personal contact information- phone, email, Facebook etc.

Prepare for transitions and good byes.

If you feel connected with a family or want to know how you can help, talk with
staff before you give out any personal information.

Clients are never allowed in your vehicle. Or your home!

When in doubt, blame Natalie! “I’m sorry, Natalie said I can’t do that...”

## confidentiality

We must keep confidentiality 100% of the time!

Do not talk to guests about other guests.

Do not tell someone calling on the phone if someone is there, who is on the
guest list, or if you have seen who they’re looking for. “I’m sorry, I can’t release
any information to you.”

CPS is only allowed into the shelter with approval from staff. A staff person must
be present. Same is for law enforcement, unless we are the ones who initiated
the contact.

Compromising confidentiality is against agency policy, and can compromise
someone’s safety!

When in doubt, take a message and tell the caller you will pass it to your
supervisor.

## Mandated Reporting

You are ALL mandated reporters of child abuse and neglect.

If you see something, say something!

If you suspect a child is being abused or neglected, you are required by law to make a
report to CPS.

You are the mandated reporter and have to make the call so that you meet your
mandated reporter requirements.

REVIEW: If you make a report, we need to know. We will never tell the client 
you made a report, but need it for our files.

You may also need information from staff before making a call so all of the important
information is included.

You have 24 hours to make the report. If making it from shelter, do so in a confidential
space (i.e., NOT at the front desk).

## calling out

Sick? Stay home!

The earlier we know, the better!

REVIEW: Monday--Friday email me ASAP that you’ll be out. If I do not respond within one
hour, call the shelter to say you’ll be out. We will get you covered.

Weekend? Holiday? After 5pm? Call the shelter.

REVIEW: If you’re a regular host and you know you can’t make a shift in two weeks, email
me and I’ll take you off the calendar. Not a problem.

### laundry


### cold weather

- just short of capacity, enough space for one family
- if you double cushion, you might be woken up.
